CSS Foundations: breakup into smaller lessons (#25260)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: foundations/html_css/the-cascade.md

Now, let's change things a little bit:

~~~html
<!-- index.html -->

<div class="main">
  <div class="list" id="subsection"></div>
</div>
~~~
~~~css
/* rule 1 */
#subsection {
  color: blue;
}

/* rule 2 */
.main .list {
  color: red;
}
~~~

In the example above, despite rule 2 having more class selectors than ID selectors, rule 1 is more specific because ID beats class. In this case, the `color: blue;` declaration would take precedence.

~~~css
/* rule 1 */
#subsection .list {
  background-color: yellow;
  color: blue;
}

/* rule 2 */
#subsection .main .list {
  color: red;
}
~~~

In this final example, both rules are using ID and class selectors, so neither rule is using a more specific selector than the other. The cascade then checks the amounts of each selector type. Both rules only have one ID selector, but rule 2 has more class selectors, so rule 2 has a higher specificity!

While the `color: red` declaration would take precedence, the `background-color: yellow` declaration would still be applied since there's no conflicting declaration for it.

> Note: When comparing selectors, you may come across special symbols for the universal selector (`*`) as well as combinators (`+`, `~`, `>`, and an empty space). These symbols do not add any specificity in and of themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="lesson-note" markdown="1">

##### Not everything adds to specificity

When comparing selectors, you may come across special symbols for the universal selector (`*`) as well as combinators (`+`, `~`, `>`, and an empty space). These symbols do not add any specificity in and of themselves.

</div>
```

~~~css
/* styles.css */

#parent {
  color: red;
}

.child {
  color: blue;
}
~~~

Despite the `parent` element having a higher specificity with an ID, the `child` element would have the `color: blue` style applied since that declaration directly targets it, while `color: red` from the parent is only inherited.

#### Rule Order

The final factor, the end of the line, the tie-breaker of the tie-breaker. Let's say that after every other factor has been taken into account, there are still multiple conflicting rules targeting an element. How does the cascade determine which rule to apply?

Really simply, actually. Whichever rule was the *last* defined is the winner.

~~~css
/* styles.css */

.alert {
  color: red;
}

.warning {
  color: yellow;
}
~~~

For an element that has both the `alert` and `warning` classes, the cascade would run through every other factor, including inheritance (none here) and specificity (neither rule is more specific than the other). Since the `.warning` rule was the last one defined, and no other factor was able to determine which rule to apply, it's the one that gets applied to the element.

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

> 1.  Go to our [CSS exercises repository](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/css-exercises), read the README, and finish the last exercise `06-cascade-fix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Go back to our [CSS exercises repository](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/css-exercises) and finish the last exercise `06-cascade-fix`.
```

> 2.  Remember the Recipe page you created as practice from the previous lesson? Well, it's rather *plain* looking, isn't it? Let's fix that by adding some CSS to it!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Remember the Recipe page you created as practice from the HTML Foundations section? Well, it's rather *plain* looking, isn't it? Let's fix that by adding some CSS to it!
```

>    * How you actually style it is completely open, but you should use the external CSS method (for this practice and moving forward). You should also try to use several of the properties mentioned in the section above (color, background color, typography properties, etc). Take some time to play around with the various properties to get a feel for what they do. For now, don't worry at all about making it look *good*. This is just to practice and get used to writing CSS, not to make something to show off on your resume, so feel free to go a little crazy for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * How you actually style it is completely open, but you should use the external CSS method (for this practice and moving forward). You should also try to use several of the properties mentioned in the previous lesson (color, background color, typography properties, etc). Take some time to play around with the various properties to get a feel for what they do. For now, don't worry at all about making it look *good*. This is just to practice and get used to writing CSS, not to make something to show off on your resume.
```
